---
layout: post-series
title: Introducing Classes
excerpt: "Classes are the basis of OOP. Java Classes are a powerful tool to accomplish Object Orientation! This article gives an introduction to Classes in Java"
comments: true
author: ashwin
category: programming
series: Java Programming
tags: [java]
image: 
  feature: "introducing-classes.jpg"
  thumb: 
---

What is a class? Well I think that the true nature of a class in java can be fully appreciated if we look at a real-world example. I'm sure all of us are familiar with the printing press. Printing presses are widely used even today. Let's take a look at how the printing press produces newspapers. First the content that will be printed on paper is etched on metal **moulds**. This metal mould is then dipped in ink and pressed over paper which generates a copy of the text in the mould on the paper.

OK, how exactly is that supposed to help me understand classes? Here's how, the metal mould is similar to a java class. The mould contains the basic information that each newspaper should have. Keep in mind that each newspaper is identical to another newspaper produced by the same printing-press. But even though two newspapers have identical information and properties they are distinct.

You said that the metal mould is similar to a java class, How are java classes different from the metal mould? Think of it this way, What if the mould instead of containing the headlines contained a blank space in which you could fill in the news yourself?! This is exactly how a java class is. Instead of providing information a class will give you blank spaces along with guidelines as to what kind of **news** (data in programming terms) you can fill in.

If this was not done then each object (newspaper) will be identical to every other object (newspaper) generated by this printing-press mould (class). In the programming world there is almost no need to generate objects (newpapers) that are identical in every way. Therefore to make each object (newspaper) unique the blank-lines can be filled in by the user of the object. Although such a newspaper would be useless it's helpful in portraying the idea of classes (mould) and objects (newspapers).

Ok, how do we create a class in java? The syntax to create a class in java is shown below:

{% highlight java %}
[access modifier]class ClassName [extends AnotherClass] [implements YetAnotherClass] {

}
{% endhighlight %}

The syntax looks complex but everything within [] is optional. So now let us create a very,very simple do-nothing class.

{% highlight java %}
class MyFirstClass {

}
{% endhighlight %}

I have just created an empty class above. The class is of no use without any data inside it. However the data can take on many types and the data-types will be explained in the next article.

The above class is like a medicine capsule except there is no medicine inside it. So the capsule by itself is of no use what so ever. However in the following articles we will learn how to add data to this class and take advantage of the powerful features provided by the Java language.